# PCA-DMD
This study introduces the method of PCA-DMD, which incorporates Principal Components Analysis (PCA) as a pre-processing technique prior to applying Dynamic Mode Decomposition (DMD).

The modern world allows for data to be collected from anywhere at any time. While there has been a dramatic increase in the processing capacity of computational machines, there is still a limit to how much they can handle. 

Dynamic Mode Decomposition (DMD) is a data-driven equation-free method that reduces high-dimensional data measurements to low dimensional structures. 
Introduced in 2008 by Peter J. Schmid, its initial aim was to extract the main dynamical features of fluid flows for the purpose of time prediction. Later it was employed in a variety of applications, such as disease modelling,  neuroscience, financial trading markets and multimedia.

Given a dynamical system, we record its evolution sequentially, as a time-series with data stored in  matrix format. For example, given a sequence of video frames of a fluid flow video, each frame is recorded as a matrix   with dimensions  three time the number  of pixels, where to each pixel corresponds its RBG digital display numbers.  Re-formulating each frame matrix at time t_i into  a column vector, 
the state of a system along a finite sequence time-interval [t_i, t_{i+n}] is represented by a snapshot matrix.  The dynamics of the system may then be represented by a time-dependent linear transformation describing the transition from a snapshot X_i to the next X_{i+1}, that is a matrix A which depends on i, so that X_{i+1}' = AX_i. DMD  selects the essential spatio-temporal information of the dynamics by calculating the eigen-decomposition of A, where the eigenvectors, called DMD modes, render the spatial features of the system, and the eigenvalues provide the temporal development  of the modes.
 
An improved method used mainly for video processing, the Compressed Dynamic Mode Decomposition (cDMD) integrates compressed sensing into DMD by using a low dimensional sub-sample  to approximate the original data. 

While DMD is an effective  method in the  dimensional reduction of dynamical systems, it is also computationally intensive. Thus it is of interest to investigate techniques that combine DMD  with  additional data  reduction methods.

Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a statistical data reduction procedure that leads to a low dimensional representation of large data sets while  capturing as much of the data variation as possible. The underlying assumption is that the data is normally distributed, forming a  multivariate Gaussian. Since a Gaussian is  described by the spectrum of its covariance matrix, 
PCA consists in finding an orthogonal linear transformation so that in the new coordinates system, "the greatest variance by some scalar projection of the data comes to lie on the first coordinate (called the first principal component), the second greatest variance on the second coordinate, and so on" 

In this work, we investigate applications of DMD and cDMD  in conjunction with PCA. Specifically, we compare results of direct applications of DMD and cDMD to those of PCA-DMD, that is  DMD preceded by the application of PCA to each snapshot matrix. We apply these methods  to both synthetic and real-world data for comparative analysis. 


Some synthetic data examples are generated through the addition of several functions. Another synthetic data  we use  is a simulation of a cylinder wake produced by a Lattice-Boltzmann model.
The real-world examples consist in a video depicting the accelerated movement of clock hands, a man turning the lights on in a room and a canoe being paddled across a lake. 

In each of these examples, employing PCA-DMD results in reductions in storage requirements and average execution time. In the case of the synthetic data generated by a function, we observe a slight execution time reduction, but this is due to the simplicity of the data. Also, all three methods are able to successfully reconstruct the original input data. In the synthetic fluid dynamics example we observe a larger decrease in average run time and storage size, while experiencing almost no reduction in image resolution. However, attempts to predict the future state of the fluids flow trigger a noticeable drop off in accuracy. The outcome remains unaffected when employing DMD. Hence, the shortcomings in predicting the future state of the system are solely an issue attributed to the DMD algorithm itself.   Finally, in the case of real-world examples the prediction results were poor, regardless of the application of DMD or PCA-DMD.
